GENERICS -- types and procedures parameterised by type
======================================================

    type Box( of T )
        as T value
    end type

    dim b as Box( of long )
    b.value = 7

    function Max( of T )( byval a as T, byval b as T ) as T
        if a > b then return a
        return b
    end function

    print Max( 3, 9 )               '' T inferred as INTEGER
    print Max( of double )( 1.5, 2.5 )

A generic is declared once and compiled once per distinct type-argument list.
There is no textual substitution, no macro, and no separate template language:
the body is captured as tokens at declaration and replayed through the real
parser at instantiation, so the code inside a generic is ordinary FreeBASIC and
is diagnosed as such.

This is RFC-0001. FOR EACH (RFC-0003), the iterator protocol (RFC-0002) and the
standard containers (RFC-0004) are all built on top of it.


WHY IT EXISTS
-------------

Before this, a container that worked for more than one element type had to be
written with macros, with ANY PTR, or once per type. All three lose something:
a macro has no scope and reports errors at the expansion; ANY PTR discards the
type and moves every mistake to run time; copies drift.

A generic keeps the type. Box( of long ) and Box( of string ) are two distinct
types, each fully checked, both written once.


DECLARING A GENERIC TYPE
------------------------

    type Box( of T )
        as T value
    end type

    type Pair( of K, V )
        as K k
        as V v
    end type

'of' introduces the type parameter list. One or more parameters, separated by
commas, each an ordinary identifier. The parameters are visible throughout the
body -- fields, member prototypes, member bodies, base type, array element
types, pointers.

The name of a generic is not a type by itself. It must always be written with a
type argument list:

    dim a as Box                    '' error 335
    type Bad extends Box            '' error 335


INSTANTIATION AND IDENTITY
--------------------------

An instantiation is created the first time a particular type-argument list is
seen, and cached. The SAME argument list always yields the SAME type:

    dim b1 as Box( of long )
    dim b2 as Box( of long )
    b2 = b1                         '' fine -- one type, not two

Different argument lists are unrelated types with no conversion between them:

    dim c as Box( of double )
    c = b1                          '' error 181: Invalid assignment/conversion

Type arguments may be anything a type can be: scalars, strings, UDTs, pointers,
and other instantiations.

    dim n as Box( of Box( of long ) )

SIZEOF, VAR, arrays, pointers, BYREF and BYVAL parameters, function results and
UDT fields all work on an instantiation exactly as on any other type.

Declaration order does not matter. A generic may be used before its member
bodies appear, and a member body may be written before any instantiation
exists -- both are captured and replayed at the next module-level statement
boundary.


MEMBERS
-------

A prototype inside the body needs nothing special. An out-of-line body repeats
the type parameter list after the generic's name:

    type Stack( of T )
        as T items( 0 to 15 )
        as integer count
        declare sub Push( byval x as T )
        declare function Pop( ) as T
    end type

    sub Stack( of T ).Push( byval x as T )
        this.items( this.count ) = x
        this.count += 1
    end sub

The list must match the declaration in arity and in NAME. Renaming a parameter
in the out-of-line body is error 341, not an alias:

    sub Stack( of U ).Push( byval x as U )      '' error 341

Constructors, destructors, copy constructors and LET all work, and run for
fields of a generic exactly as for a plain UDT -- a Box( of string ) constructs
and destroys its string.

Member operators and properties work:

    type Arr( of T )
        as T e( 0 to 3 )
        declare operator [] ( byval i as integer ) byref as T
        declare operator cast( ) as integer
        declare property first( ) as T
        declare property first( byval x as T )
    end type

    operator Arr( of T ).[] ( byval i as integer ) byref as T
        return this.e( i )
    end operator

including the FOR / STEP / NEXT trio, which is what makes an instantiation
usable as an ordinary FOR counter.


GENERIC PROCEDURES
------------------

    sub Swap2( of T )( byref a as T, byref b as T )
    function Max( of T )( byval a as T, byval b as T ) as T
    function Pick( of A, B )( byval x as A, byval y as B ) as A

Call with explicit type arguments, or let them be inferred from the argument
types:

    print Max( of double )( 1.5, 2.5 )      '' explicit
    print Max( 3, 9 )                       '' inferred

Inference reads the parameter positions only. A type parameter that appears
only in the return type is therefore callable but not inferable, which is
correct rather than a gap:

    function MakeZero( of T )( ) as T
    dim z as long = MakeZero( of long )( )

When two arguments would bind the same parameter to different types, inference
does not pick a winner -- it reports error 340 and asks for the arguments to be
written out. An implicit promotion is not a match.

A generic procedure may call another generic procedure, and a generic type's
member may call a generic procedure.


GENERIC GLOBAL OPERATORS
------------------------

    operator + ( of T )( byref x as Box( of T ), byref y as Box( of T ) ) as Box( of T )
        dim as Box( of T ) r
        r.v = x.v + y.v
        return r
    end operator

There is nowhere in 'a + b' to write type arguments, so they are inferred from
the operand types, including through the nested position: an operand that is an
instantiation of Box binds T from ITS argument list. Nothing is registered until
an instantiation exists -- '+' for Box( of integer ) exists because somebody
added two of them.

Self-assignment operators (+=, -=, ...) must be members, as in plain FreeBASIC:

    operator += ( of T )( ... )     '' error 152: Operator must be a member function


INHERITANCE, VIRTUAL AND RTTI
-----------------------------

All three directions work:

    type Sq( of T ) extends Shape           '' generic extends concrete
    type IntBox extends Box( of integer )   '' concrete extends instantiation
    type Der( of T ) extends Root( of T )   '' generic extends generic

VIRTUAL, ABSTRACT, overriding an override, and OBJECT-derived RTTI all behave as
they do for plain types. 'x is T' works through a base pointer, and -- because
RTTI compares mangled name strings at run time -- two DIFFERENT instantiations
correctly report false for each other:

    print ( *r is Der( of long ) )          '' from a Root( of long ) ptr


SELF-REFERENCE, NESTING AND DEPTH
---------------------------------

A generic may refer to itself through a pointer, which is what makes linked
structures expressible:

    type Node( of T )
        as T v
        as Node( of T ) ptr nxt
    end type

Nesting a generic in its own type ARGUMENT list is fine and terminates:
Box( of Box( of long ) ) resolves the inner instantiation before the outer body
is replayed, so it costs no depth.

Depth accrues only when one generic's BODY drives another instantiation. The
limit is '-maxinstdepth' (default 64); exceeding it is error 339. A genuinely
runaway self-instantiation is usually caught earlier by the forward-reference
machinery, so the counter is a backstop.


HOW IT WORKS
------------

Four sentences, because nothing else in fbc looks like this.

1. A generic's body is captured as a TOKEN CHAIN at declaration and replayed
   through the real parser once per distinct type-argument list, with the type
   parameters bound as TYPEDEFs in a synthetic namespace. No textual
   substitution, no separate template AST.

2. Member bodies and generic-procedure bodies are DEFERRED to the next
   module-level statement boundary, because an instantiation happens
   mid-statement and a procedure cannot be opened there. This is also what
   makes declaration order irrelevant.

3. Every instantiation is built AT MODULE LEVEL whatever the parser was doing,
   because a UDT with member procedures is illegal below module level. A
   generic instantiated inside a procedure still emits a module-level type.

4. There is no new AST node, no new IR node, no backend change and no runtime
   call. An instantiation is an ordinary UDT by the time anything downstream
   sees it.


NAMES AND LINKAGE
-----------------

Instantiations are mangled Itanium-style, so they demangle to something a human
recognises and are byte-identical regardless of declaration order:

    $3BoxIiE           ->  Box<int>
    $3BoxIdE           ->  Box<double>
    $3BoxI3BoxIiEE     ->  Box<Box<int> >

Two modules that both write Box( of long ) mean the same type, and each emits
the members it reached. Because PE/COFF here offers no working COMDAT (see
KNOWN LIMITS), each module keeps its own copy and they are module-private. That
costs size, not correctness: a multi-module program links and behaves as one
type.


DIAGNOSTICS
-----------

    error 333: Expected type parameter name
    error 334: Duplicated type parameter
    error 335: Generic used without a type argument list
    error 336: Wrong number of type arguments
    error 337: Type argument list given for something that is not generic
    error 338: Unbalanced block in generic body
    error 339: Generic instantiation too deep
    error 340: Unable to infer type arguments, specify them explicitly
    error 341: Type parameter list does not match the generic's declaration
    error 358: Generic methods are not supported, a member cannot have type
               parameters of its own; use a generic SUB or FUNCTION taking
               the object as a parameter

Everything else is an ordinary FreeBASIC diagnostic, reported from the replayed
body and followed by the instantiation chain that reached it, so it is possible
to see which type argument caused it:

    box.bas(13) error 14: Expected identifier, found 'Wdiget' in 'as Wdiget oops'
      in instantiation of 'Box( of long )'
      required from box.bas(18)

The line number and the quoted source are the offending line's own, in the file
the generic is declared in -- a header, when it is declared in one.  The body is
replayed from memory, so the lexer counts the replayed lines itself (see
lexLineNum in lex.bas); errors/generic-body-lines.bas pins both.


KNOWN LIMITS
------------

All measured, none blocking.

  - No constraints on type parameters. A member that needs '=' on T makes the
    whole type unusable for a T without one -- which is why Array's Sort,
    IndexOf and Contains are free procedures rather than members. The
    diagnostic lands inside the container header at the instantiation site,
    which is honest but not friendly. This is the strongest practical argument
    for adding constraints later; four fail-container-* tests pin the current
    behaviour.

  - No generic methods. A member procedure cannot have type parameters of its
    own -- 'declare sub Sort( of F )( byval cmp as F )' is error 358 -- so a
    method cannot take a lambda whose type it does not already know. Write a
    generic SUB or FUNCTION that takes the object as a parameter, or give the
    TYPE the extra type parameter. Adding them means adding members to an
    instantiated TYPE after it is complete, once per call-site argument list,
    with their own mangling; that is a feature, not a fix, and is not done.

  - typeof( T ) does not see through a type parameter. An ordinary TYPEDEF is
    transparent to typeof; the one an instantiation binds is not, so a generic
    body cannot branch on what T is bound to. This is why the hash contract is
    an overloaded HashOf( ) rather than an #if dispatch.

  - One copy of each instantiation per module. True weak/COMDAT is not
    achievable on PE/COFF by either route tried -- __attribute__((weak))
    produces a weak EXTERNAL and silently breaks virtual dispatch, and '.weak'
    in gas64 crashes the binary. Instantiations are therefore module-private.
    Costs size, not correctness.

  - The LLVM backend's linkonce_odr is UNVERIFIED. No LLVM toolchain was
    available and the backend is not in the test gate. If it is wrong, the
    fallback is 'private', matching the other three backends.

  - Debug names are not unique. Every instantiation of Box reports as 'Box' to
    the debugger, so GDB sees N distinct types sharing one name.

  - Function-template return types are not mangled: '_Z3IncIiEi' where Itanium
    wants the return type after the I...E list. Names are unique and stable,
    which is what is claimed.

  - A type parameter cannot be named K. Plain FreeBASIC already rejects a
    TYPEDEF named K used as a parameter type; this is not a generics rule, but
    it is met most often here. Names also collide case-insensitively, so a
    parameter T and a variable t are the same identifier.


TESTS
-----

src/tests/generics/ -- 42 files.

  instantiate-type.bas        instantiation, identity, nesting, UDT arguments
  member-procs.bas            out-of-line bodies, both parameter orders
  member-operators.bas        operators, properties, FOR/STEP/NEXT
  global-operators.bas        generic global operators and their inference
  generic-procs.bas           explicit and inferred type arguments
  ctor-dtor.bas               construction, destruction, copy
  inheritance.bas             all three EXTENDS directions, virtual, RTTI
  recursive-generic.bas       self-reference through a pointer
  sizeof-instantiation.bas    layout
  member-mangling.bas         mangled names are distinct and stable
  capture-boundary.bas        deferral to the statement boundary
  multimodule/                two modules instantiating the same generics
  fail-*.bas                  one diagnostic per file, with golden output

One caveat on member-mangling.bas: since instantiations became module-private,
an exact-mangled-name link assertion is no longer expressible. The test still
catches a COLLAPSE -- two instantiations sharing a name -- but would not catch a
drift to a different, still-distinct scheme.

See also:
  docs/for_each/iterator-protocol.txt   the RFC-0002 contract
  docs/for_each/for-each.txt            RFC-0003
  docs/array|map|set|linkedlist/        RFC-0004, written entirely in FB
